Aesthetics, Taste, and Sustainability.

Reference:
http://www.readingdesign.org/robinson-crusoe
http://www.readingdesign.org/rightness
http://www.readingdesign.org/manifestos-jasper-morrison
http://www.readingdesign.org/super-normal

Books?
Websites?

»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»


Arts-based Disciplines in Face of a Carbon Challenged Future

Carmela Cucuzzella
John Calvelli
carmela.cucuzzella@concordia.ca
john.calvelli@acad.ca

The human activity of making art has been practiced for millennia prior to settling, at the beginning of the industrial era, into the current disciplinary structures of what we now name craft, design, or architecture. Given the rise of atmospheric carbon since then and the projection of catastrophic climate change, how may this ecology of the arts-based disciplines change in response? This session is proposed as a means to gauge what kinds of shifts within and amongst current practices are taking place today that might point to the emergence of a new configuration of arts-based disciplines in response to a projected future of radical climate change. Proposals from practitioners, theorists, and historians are welcome that explore current as well as possible shifts within and between the arts-based disciplines in response to this major epochal change.

»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»

Aesthetics, Taste, Sustainability, and Graphic Design.

Towards and sustainable understanding of graphic design aesthetics...

- Graphic Designers mainly make ephemeral work (Everything we make is garbage...)
- Most graphic design projects are about making (or remaking) something in a new form. This is typically for newness's sake only, not for a real need.
- This is resource intensive.

- Sustainability is a new ideal
- Art Historically, new ideal in the hands of artists and designers are indicative of new forms; new aesthetic ground is arrived at through new ideals, not just for style's sake...
- Sustainability must leave behind the aesthetic trappings of consumerism and capitalism and find its own formal “rightness”

- To define sustainability, you must first define what you want to sustain. 
- It can be easier to define what you don't want to sustain.
- I do not want to sustain the current, shallow, consumerist society we are in
- Thus I also do not want to use or sustain the visual trappings from said consumerist culture.
- so what does sustainable graphic design look like if that is the case?


»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»

Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby present in their essay “Designer as Author” a variety examples of designed works that critique the consumerist, capitalist status quo. They argue that design holds a unique place in culture — it is widely understood by the populace at large — and unlike fine art can be used in a serious way to explain new ideas or challenge existing beliefs. 

All design is ideological — it is representative of the culture and climate it comes from, or the ideals its progenitor chooses to exeplify. Since most design is used for the sake of commerce, the ideals it often exemplifies are those of consumerism: moving more units. Graphic design is especially at fault for this. Graphic designers often wrap a less than perfect or less than desirable product in fancy clothes to make it seem more necessary or more desirable. There are certain styles and aesthetics that immediately allow for capitalist correctness...

Dunne and Raby?

Sustainability, at least as I choose to define it, is at odds with much of contemporary consumerist culture. How then might sustainable design correctly wrap its ideals? If the ideals are different, must the forms be different as well?

Ehrenfeld and defining sustainability...

Beauty and sustainability? Architecture of Happiness & Sterling?

Modernism came initially from a place of social change... Now its been coopted by business, capitalism, and consumer goods. (where did I read that???)

Bruce Mau? Massive Change?

Certain styles do speak to grass roots campaigns... small farms... community organizations... these are generally considered to be “bad” or “naive” by the design establishment... they do not pass muster amongst the business community either. Are they more in alignment with the ideals of sustainability? When we talk about “good” design we are generally using the aesthetics of corporate america as the standard for goodness. Bad design is either non-design, common or vernacular design, or else potentially confrontational with more mainstream beliefs... 

Is there still an avant-garde? 

Vernacular?

Low-brow high brow?

Enzo Mari?

Styles? Taste? Aesthetics?

Christopher Alexander talks about form making from the point of view of analysis of a system — you analyze the forces at work, and your design solution should be a direct response to those forces. (notes on the synthesis of form). To me that means that a certain aesthetic might be the outcome of a set of forces.

If an aesthetic is just due to an arbitrary decision from the designer or just to replicate something interesting the designer may have seen before, then this is surface style... it is not sustainable...?



»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»
»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»
»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»

An old, similar idea:::

Kristian Bjørnard
Professor, Graphic Design, Maryland Institute College of Art, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
kbjornard@mica.edu

Paper Title:
What Does Sustainable Graphic Design Look Like?


\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\


Abstract:
What does sustainable graphic design look like? I posed this question to myself as a thought experiment meant to launch visual exploration. Four main “answers” were examined for formal implications: sustainable design looks “eco-friendly;” sustainable design looks “innovative;”sustainable design looks “the same;” and sustainable design looks like nothing [it does not exist]). I analyzed each solution’s merits and limitations. 

The first three solutions yielded obvious visual aesthetics. The last posited that there is no sustainable aesthetic. That sustainable graphic design might not exist is where the most interesting conceptual alternatives lie. Investigating how one makes “graphic design that doesn’t exist” revealed new conceptual paths, particularly in the realm of “systems.”  

I’ll offer a design process that evolved from this series of experiments. Said process makes aesthetic choices based on principles inherited from our vernacular past. This provides a fifth visual answer to the initial question outside the initial four explorations.



