Dieter Rams Documentary

What is good design?
The total configuration of a product
from color material construction

you have to understand people to be a good designer

deisgn should be as simple as possible

the time of thoughtless design for thoughtless consumption is over

To be great you have to find the right people. people who can actually achieve something through collaboration. people who think beyond what they are responsible for on a daily basis. people who ask "what will our society be like in the future?"

What kind of transportation do we need???

Landscape architecture???

shaping our environment is the most important thing -- dieter rams

We need to start with the landscape, not the machine.
Design is not about beautification. We want to make things better, not make better looking things.

Sophie Lovell
( I think I have her book?)

Why is he so interesting now??? precarious technological and social change -- does that mean these same things are important now?

His life is his work. his work is his life. he is not really interested in anything else.

Design is also politics
If you want to create a world that is a better place; more democratic, whatever, design can be a tool to give people freedom! or a tool to enforce capitalist consumption! or a tool for racism or whatever else -- design isn't a neutral tool; how and where it is wielded has ideology and consequence.

Everything has to be made better...
More modern???

Huge change: rebuild germany, rethink people! what we are, what we do!
How can deisgn be more "social" -- meaning about helping people; improving the everyday person's life

Ulm school?

> Environmental design, as a holistic approach to human habitation, combined with political education was seen as a strategy for strengthening democratic ideals within society. (from https://monoskop.org/Ulm_School_of_Design)

Braun TP-1 > Rams: I asked the engineers, can it play from underneath? then they figured out all the other things... the designer just needs to ask the questions! and then find the people to answer them for you.

It is signifacnt how humanity has changed. Technology is changing faster all of the time. Think of all the computers. You get a computer today, it is obsolete tomorrow. No industry is interested in repairing things. It is a phenonmenon; its just easier to replace them. we have to get away from the unculutre of abundance -- there is no future with so many redundant things. Less but better is also about our behaviour, not just our stuff. Less but better is useful applied to everything!??!!

from https://www.vitsoe.com/us/voice/60-years-of-vitsoe

> why do people need these objects in the first place, and how can they best be made?

> take into account the effects of the product and its production on social systems, hierarchies and, importantly, ecology.

back to film:

why is it made this way? is it the material? what is the story? why are you doing this?

Design only really works when it strives to achieve something for humanity!

from: https://ask.audio/articles/brian-eno-to-score-dieter-rams-design-documentary
> But one of the most interesting parts of Dieter's story is that he now looks back on his career with some regret. "If I had to do it over again, I would not want to be a designer," he has said. "There are too many unnecessary products in this world." He has long been an advocate for the ideas of environmental consciousness and long-lasting products. RAMS is a design documentary, but it’s also a rumination on consumerism, materialism, and sustainability. Dieter's philosophy is about more than just design, it’s a about a way to live. It’s about getting rid of distractions and visual clutter, and just living with what you need.

design is being a connector, being a node, a nexus

Attitude: design as a real philosophy can encompass all aspects of your life

Less but better is a philosophy. More for those who need it and the planet??? i don't know where that thought was going

I find it better to improve things than to always come up with something new. - DR

get away from the un-culture of abundance - DR

good design doesn't just happen its an outgrowth of our education - DR

do we say if we think something isn't good? are we too indifferent now?

design should give answers and make things better -- not make MORE problems

"Functionalism" through the context of the environment?

Less, but better

simple. pure. honest.

do you want to make things beautiful, or do you want to make things better?

as little design as possible

design is also politics: design to give people freedom! design to rethink what people are! deign to rethink how we live!

ulm school; post wweii; post bauhaus -- what was their deal? 

Hans Gugelot

what to aspire too: people who can achieve something through collaboration!