Toward a Sustainabilitist aesthetic.

V3

I’m going to try and frame two decades of making as attempts at answering an aesthetic question.

If you are a modernist designer, your work looks like modernism. If you are a post modern designer, your work looks like post modernism. If you are a Sustainabilitist designer, what is your work supposed to look like?

In 2006 I started hanging around some people who were making and selling biodiesel. 

Made design for them

This was sustainable design, it was for the right kinds of orgs; it had the right content; it was made from the better materials. But it mostly looked the same — other than a few eco tropes. 

Is this the answer? Sustained graphic design really just looks the same as “mainstream” design, but is just made/messages sustainable things?

Well...

That wasn’t totally satisfactory
Being less bad wasn’t my intent. I wanted to signal the difference in intent in what my work looked like!

In looking to artists and designers from previous movements, innovators we document are known for novel visuals arrived at through exploring new ideologic territory and experimenting with different ways of thinking. Avant garde visuals stemming from these movements were the result of the ideas (or ideals) to come out of their novel thinking, not the main ideas themselves. Our art historical past is not about style for style’s sake, but style that illuminates a theoretical position (or at least style that is arrived at from a thought process, from a set of values, or from some set of hypotheses). 

If we’re signalllong environemttall friendliness; better connection with natural systems; can our aesthetics be inspired by nature? 

Looks eco friendly?

This devolves to crunchy granola?

How to get to innovative?


Anti climate change design

Dystopian???????????????

Old/vintage??????????????

Dunne and raby speculative design 

Christopher Alexander formal fit

Sustainabilitist library

Green acres > print manifesto > ecovention Europe 

The libre designer

Signs signaling sustainability

Now while I’ve given you a 

Free/libre open source

Vernacular design

It doesn’t exist?

Relational design / Blauvelt 

Architecture of happiness 

Bruce sterling?

Climate designers

Reuse of found art? 

I’ve used that wood grain drawing over and over again since 2008

Entropy: if everything is veering towards chaos, how to linit change so as to lessen entropy? My own design vernacular!

Reduction: is minimalism an ideal aesthetic for sustainability

Green acres book. Ecovention book.

Signs signaling sustainability. Does that mean that a patched elbow is sustainable graphic design? Riding ones bike is sgd? Building a lamp of found materials is sgd? Or the documentation of those things?

Reduce reuse recycle stuff from students?


