Understanding sustainability

Understanding Sustainability 

Contemporary attempts for defining where sustainability exists call out three key areas importance: the economy, society and the environment. [note: Some examples use a fourth realm, adding a human sphere to the discussion. This fourth area makes the distinction between individual (human) and community (societal) concerns. This essay considers individual concerns a subset of community concerns]. These three realms' interactions can be described with two mental models. One represents the reality of these area's existences, while the second represents the decision making process in regards to each area’s sustainability. The diagrams can be described more simply as actions and philosophy.
 
The three main realms of sustainability are as follows: economic sustainability, social sustainability, and environmental sustainability. An economic system viable over time describes Economic Sustainability. It pays off initial capital investment and is able to cover operating costs. However, traditional economic models may not take into consideration the “costs” of sea-level rise, habitat destruction, desertification, etc. Social Sustainability focuses on meeting the necessities of people in a community: food, shelter, equality, education, etc. A society that does not look after its own cannot be sustained. Environmental Sustainability is phrased in terms of repairing and maintaining nature; often to the detriment of our manufactured world and without consideration for established socioeconomic systems. This disregard for the human element is un-sustainable. We too are a part of nature, and must be treated as such. 

Understanding sustainability as these overlapping realms  closely represents how we actually interact with our world, how decisions can be made that may not take into account a holistic view. This is the “Actions” representation. And this is how most business decisions are made and how sustainability is often talked about publicly. A group or organization is often only focused on one kind of sustainability (all businesses, large or small, shoot for economic sustainability). A choice can be made that is sustainable in one realm, but it might not carry over into either of the other two areas. If you visualize these realms as intersecting ovals, there are areas of overlap. Choices in one sector can thus be made that take into account the other realms. The most important area of overlap, as far as sustainability is concerned, is where all three sections end up crossing. 

True sustainability lives at this trifecta. 

For something to be truly sustainable it must fulfill all of the requirements for sustainability in all three areas (e.g. A business that focuses on providing green services without being able to pay rent will not succeed long-term, thus will not be able to perpetuate its ideals, not be able to prosper from the initial capital investments of labor, materials, start-up-cash, and thus not be sustainable—it does not fulfill any of the requirements for economic sustainability). 

The second way of seeing these three realms is more of a model for our relationship to the world and each other. It is how the world works, how we should see the world. This is why it is a “philosophy.” The economy, society, and nature share a scaler parent-child relationship. The economy is the smallest piece and is a construct of our society, thus must live withing it. Society then exists in the same way inside of nature, for without nature, we could not have our society. With this understanding it becomes apparent that any action in one of the inner realms affects the other outer realms. This concept is described generally as a whole systems view (This also is referred to as a whole earth view, a whole systems approach, a general systems theory, a holistic view, etc…). Over-arching, total sustainability cannot exist without acknowledging the concept of an all-encompassing nature. This point of the holistic view is not that we must revert to a primitive worship of nature or a hunter-gatherer lifestyle, it is that we as humans, and all of our human constructs—physical and theoretical—are a derivative of nature. A skyscraper ends up being no less a part of the natural world than a tree.

The two models generally exist separately, as they describe different aspects of our world and lives. However, the small area of triadic overlap of economy/society/nature from the first ideal is where the two models become one. In this place the reality of the world connects with our ability to make decisions and we are able to connect actions and a holistic world view. With this model in mind, decision making can be targeted and applied to all three areas at once. Provided with these two conceptual models for sustainability one has a much better chance of understanding and reaching true sustainability.

The aim of sustainability is in balancing freedoms with restraint…




