Utopian Gestures v4

This talk is called "These gestures are undoubtedly utopian".
I'm going to use a couple of my own projects to investigate a question: what might sustainable design look like? Along the way I'll talk about free/libre open source, definitions of sustainability, try to capture "what sustainable designing" is, vernacular architecture... all manner of things.

If you are a modernist designer, your work looks like modernism. If you are a post modern designer, your work looks like post modernism. If you are a minimalist, your work looks like minimalism. If you are a Sustainabilitist designer, what is your work supposed to look like?

[what to show at this intro???]
[modern]
[post modern]
[sustainable?]

In looking to artists and designers from previous movements, innovators we document are known for novel visuals arrived at through exploring new ideologic territory and experimenting with different ways of thinking. Avant garde visuals stemming from these movements were the result of the ideas (or ideals) to come out of their novel thinking, not the main ideas themselves. Our art historical past is not about style for style’s sake, but style that illuminates a theoretical position (or at least style that is arrived at from a thought process, from a set of values, or from some set of hypotheses). 

[Image???]

Historically design and sustainability have frequently mixed

[bucky?]
[whole earth catalog?]
[Massive change?]
[some cool architecture?]

Do I need to define sustainability? At least what I mean? And how that relates to designing?

The time I spent in graduate school my work was meant to show potential answers to the question "What does sustainable graphic design look like?" -- I framed my previous work from my life before my m4a and current projects via that lens...

My practice has been on a certain kind of trajectory.

Tie in SundaysEnergy in this "intro" sort of part? Or at least tie into works/visuals from the field?
	- things look eco-friendly?
	- things look the same?
	- things look innovative?

[sustainabilitist library]

One of the last pieces of "design" I made as a grad student was called "the sustainabilitist library." It had started as an exploration of the research into various design methods and principles that different designers and artists and thinkers shared from the realm of environmentalism and sustainability I had been compiling. My theory was that there were some overarching ideals; if you incorporate these ways of thinking; or understood these principles; you'd more readily make sustainable design instead of regular design...

The sculpture-as-poster (poster-as-sculpture?) tried to fully embody the principles themselves...

[the principles? More images of the library?]

As a design piece, I'm still proud of this; the way it was produced for the exhibition was very carefully planned...

[digress to interest in minimalist conceptual art?]
[Lawrence Weiner 36x36 piece?]
https://www.moma.org/collection/works/137437?artist_id=6288&page=1&sov_referrer=artist

https://www.moma.org/learn/moma_learning/joseph-kosuth-one-and-three-chairs-1965/

Explanation of the sustainabilitist library

Principles that stood out to me were about emphmerality vs permanism.
Obviously each has its benefactors and cnitrburs. So contributor means that literally the person is contributing; which could been set their 

So this design was able to come together for the exhibition; live its temporal time; and then go back to its constituent pieces, more or less unchanged after the fact!

I still haven't made a better example of sustainable design; design that doesn't exist in the best possible way!

For my own work, sure, that's a solution that might work; but where/how might this play out into my other projects? Into work for clients?

Because, yeah, that "this doesn't exist" idea IS utopian; what happens when these ideals meet the regular, the status quo?

Wood grain example? Using that wood grain drawing from grad schoool still in things 10 years later?

[Green Acres?]

I worked with a curator on many projects. Sue Spaid. She's carved out this space for herself around exhibiting works by artists that fall into this ecologically inventive space -- she calls them EcoVentions

I worked on this book with her; green acres

The book was a collection of essays about different ways artists have been engaging with/in farming over the last several decades. The exhibition had key dates it was running in Cleveland (confirm place); but we wanted the accompanying book to be more than merely a catalog. It needed to be useful beyond the exhibition. I was still trying to channel this "what does sustainable graphic design" thing. And I thought, well how could I use the design of the book to put into contrast many of the ways these artists work to what we normally think about regarding "farms"

Grid and decorations based on aerial maps of industrial farm land

Print method wise on demand and digital to save paper; save ink; recycled content

There was some interesting thinking into the design; but it doesn't really manifest itself as a new kind of visual
However, it does tap into some of the principles?

Vernacular design tangent?

Get us back to Green Acres and then Ecovention Europe?
(And the square format was also used in the original ecovention book; and then the Patricia Johanson book... as they are sort of a unofficial series, the shapes are meant to relate!)

[Ecovention Europe images]
[compare with Green Acres????]

Ecovention Europe, a sort of follow up exhibition and catalog; utilized the same page layouts. The same grids, the same sizes, the same typeface choices. What we did to extend the idea was to cram more content on each page. Green Acres had all these moments of decoration -- what if we got rid of those? Put more content on each page? And the color palette was intentionally crafted to utilize full color, but less ink... 

Print manifesto? Other questions this raised for me?

[Sara de bondt and radical nature]

Is that sustainable graphic design? What did that look like? Did that change anything????

Contemporary Identity?

Free/Libre Open Source?

HR Mag <> OOKB styles?

Any other Sustainabilitist Principles?

Climate Designers?

Bamboo lamp?

Slides? Design Writing?

How/where to show college work?
How/Where to show reference works I enjoy from out in the world?

Conclusion!?
[these gestures are undoubtedly utopian slide?]

End with the bamboo lamp? Returning to that idea of just coming together and going apart? Found materials? Signs signaling sustainability? And anything is a sdibn? Graphic design is everything? What else is utopian?

Where does f/los fit in to this talk? Again about reuse? 

