[gd3] ¶ conceptual art ?s

¶'s in conceptual Art Questions
========

1. In conceptual art, the final artwork or physical representation is less important than the idea behind it. Are there examples in graphic design that this is similar to? 

2. Is process more important than product, or does that go against the function of graphic design?
Do you think that ideas, even without physical forms, are works of art? 
Do you find this true in your own work?

3. Lewitt talks about Conceptual Art as 'purposeless' and 'emotionally dry,' focusing more on the mental experience the viewer may have. Is this something you think is important to design? Do you think that without a purpose, design is empty, or more successful? Is there a balance?

4. By focusing on the idea over the outcome, there is less emphasis on craftsmanship and artistic skill. In what ways does this relate to methods of production?  Is there a divergence here with digital design vs the recent trend of increased craftsmanship?

5. Does having a strong concept and idea makes the end medium irrelevant?
(ex - the concept could work as a print piece, motion piece, 3D piece, as long as the theory behind it is solid)

6. Lewitt mentions that most ideas that are successful are ludicrously simple—Have you heard this at all before in anything we've discussed?

7. Lewitt states that to thoroughly explore an idea conceptually, an artist must limit chance, whimsy and taste from the making process. What does this description sound similar to? Is conceptual art making a mechanical process? What about Graphic Design?

8. Having preset plans for a process removes the necessity of designing each work in turn. Do you find this valuable for designers as a working method? Why or Why not?

9. Thinking about modular units, Lewitt notes that making each basic unit deliberately uninteresting makes them easier to integrate as a whole. Does this 'kit of parts' concept help with anything people are working on for this project? 
Ultimately the way the parts are used becomes the end result; has this worked for you?

10. Lewitt mentions that some artists confuse new materials with new ideas. Is this a problem in Graphic Design? How so?

11. Conceptual Art is good only when the idea is good. Do you think this is the same with design? Is it possible to have 'good' design that is ugly? 

12. What happens when you replace the word 'artist' with 'designer' in this essay? 

